% Reboot

I deleted my other blov posts because I hadn't pinned down what I wanted to do with my blov yet, so I ended up just proving various math things. But I already have my math notes section, so it seems like math stuff should go there. Also I hadn't been typing much in the way of big picture stuff, which is a deficiency I should very much like to remedy now.

In the past few months I have flirted with a variety of subjects, including projective geometry, linear algebra, group theory, ring theory, module theory, propositional logic, universal algebra, and probably some others I forgot, but recently I have turned most of my focus to just one: multivariable real analysis. It is a lack of knowledge of this subject that is holding me back from other topics I want to study, so I am tackling it head on.

I was happy to find that my past studies of metric space topology, linear algebra and a tiny bit of real analysis have given me most of what I need to start reading Munkres' **Analysis on Manifolds**. There is some real analysis stuff I have had to review and some I had to study to get up to speed, but nothing fancy (so far the biggest fact has been the mean value theorem). Actually, here I speak mostly in terms of understanding the words/definitions, but Munkres' proofs are largely impenetrable to me. So far I have been able to prove everything on my own, but continuous differentiability implying that the total derivative exists eludes me at the moment.

Multivariable real analysis is the most difficult subject I've studied so far, and in honor of that I'm going to cut this blog post short and hit the books.
