# Group theory notes

## Prerequisites
Basic set theory (sets, unions, intersections, cartesian products, relations, functions). In particular, binary operations (<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_operation>) and restrictions of a function (<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Restriction_(mathematics)>). Also, equivalence relations, in particular that each equivalence relation yields a partition and vice versa.

## Fundamentals

A **group** is a set $G$ with a binary operation on $G$ which is 1) associative, 2) has a unit, and 3) has inverses under the operation for each $g \in G$.

That means that 1) $\forall a,b,c \in G$ $a \circ (b \circ c) = (a \circ b) \circ c$, 2) there is an element $u \in G$ such that for every $g \in G$ u \circ g = g \circ u = g$, and 3) for every $g \in G$ there exists an $h \in G$ such that $g \circ h = h \circ g = v$, where $v$ is one of the units that (2) stipulates must exist.

**Unit is unique:** If there are two such elements $u$ and $e$, such that for any $g \in G$, $ug = gu = g$ and $eg = ge = g$, then $u = ue = e$.

By convention we notate the unique unit of group $G$ as $e$, or $e_G$ if we need to distinguish between the units of two groups.

**The cancellation law** For all $a,b,c \in G$, $ab = ac$ means that, since there's a $d \in G$ such that $da = ad = e$, we must have $d(ab) = d(ac)$, so by associativity $b = c$. The same strategy suffices to show that $if ba = ca$, then $b = c$. The former property could be called *left cancellation* and the latter *right cancellation*. Groups have *both* properties.

**Inverses are unique:** If $d$ and $f$ are both inverses for $a$, then $d = de = d(af) = (da)f = ef = f$.

Since inverses are unique, we can define a function $\cdot^{-1}$ which takes each elemeent of the group to its inverse. Hence we will often denote the inverse of $g \in G$ by $g^{-1}$.

**Unique solvability of equations:** For fixed $a, b \in G$, the equations $xa = b$ and $ay = b$ have unique solutions. Clearly $x = b a^{-1]$ is one possible solution. If $za = b$, then $za = xa$, and by cancellation $x = z$. So $x = b a^{-1}$ is the unique solution. The same argument shows that $y = a^{-1} b$ is the unique solution of the second equation.

**Inverses of inverses:** $\forall g \in G$, $(g^{-1})^{-1}$ is the unique solution to $xg^{-1} = e$. But $g$ solves that as well, so they must be the same.

**Inverse of product is product of inverses:** Similarly to the previous proof, $b^{-1} a^{-1}$ solves $x(ab) = e$.

**Parens can be dropped in group products:** [See here for now](http://www.wabbo.org/blov/20130506-associative_operators_on_n_args.html)

A group whose operation is commutative is called a **commutative** (naturally enough) or an **abelian**  group.

The **order** of a group $G$ is the cardinality of the underlying set of the group. We notate this $|G|$ (which is not a special notation, it is just the standard notation for the cardinality of a set). For *finite* groups, the order is just the number of group elements. There are infinite groups as well (e.g. the integers over addition).

**Power notation:** For any group $G$, with $g \in G$, we define $g^0 = e$, $g^1 = g$, $g^2 = gg$, and $g^n = g g^{n-1}$ for any $n \in \mathbb{P}$. We can also define $g^{-2} = g^{-1} g^{-1}$ and $g^{-n} = g^{-1} g^{-n + 1}$.

## Subgroups

A subset $H$ of (the underlying set of) a group $G$ is called a **subgroup* precisely when the group operation being restricted to $H$ makes $H$ into a group.

**Alternate characterization of subgroups:** A subset $S$ of $G$ is a subgroup iff it is closed under products of $G$ and contains all its inverses (in $G$).

*Proof:* Obviously a subgroup (being a group) is closed under products and contains its inverses. Conversely, since $\forall a,b \in S$, $ab \in S$, the restriction of the $G$ operation to $S$ is closed over $S$, so the restriction is well-defined. It's also associative since it's associative for all elements in $G$. Since all $a \in S$ have $a^{-1} \in S$ as well, then $a a^{-1} = e \in S$, so $S$ contains the unit of $G$ (which is obviously a unit for $S$). This means the restriction of the group operation to $S$ turns $S$ into a group, so it is a subgroup. $\Box$

**Intersection of subgroups is a subgroup:** If $H_1$ and $H_2$ are subgroups of $G$, then $H_1 \cap H_2$ is too. More generally. an arbitrary collection $\mathcal{H}$ of subgroups of $G$ is a subgroup.

*Proof:* If $a, b \in \bigcap \mathcal{H}$, then $a$ and $b$ are elements of each subgroup in $\mathcal{H}$, so $ab$ is an element of each as well. Hence $ab \in \bigcap \mathcal{H}$. Similarly, $a^{-1} \in \bigcap \mathcal{H}$. $\Box$

**Subgroup generated by a subset:** If $S \subseteq G$, it  may not necessarily form a subgroup (if, for example, the product of two elements in $S$ is not in $S$, or if an inverse is missing). We can create a subgroup that contains $S$ by adding precisely the elements that are missing, and we call this the *subgroup generated by $S$*. It is defined by

$$\langle S \rangle := \{s_1^{k_1} \cdots s_n^{k_n} : s_i \in S, k_i \in \mathbb{Z}\}$$

In other words, its the set of all possible products of integer powers of elements of $S$. 

We can see that this must be a subgroup, because the product of two products of integer powers of elements of $S$ is again a product of integer powers of elements of $S$. Also, to obtain the inverse for a product of integer powers, reverse the order of elements and negate the power. This inverse is clearly in $\langle S \rangle$.

We look next at a particularly important special case.

The **cyclic subgroup generated by $g$** is the subgroup generated by the singleton set $\{g\}$ for $g \in G$. It is the set $\langle g \rangle = \{ g^k : k \in \mathbb{Z}\}$

More generally, we say a group $G$ is **cyclic** if it is *generated* by a single element, meaning that there is some $c \in G$ such that for every $g \in G$, $g = c^k$ for some $k \in \mathbb{Z}$. In words: every element of $G$ can be represented as a power of some fixed element.

The **order** of an element $g \in G$ is defined to be the order of the cyclic subgroup generated by $g$.

I'm not sure this next one is important, but I've included it because I think it's neat.

**Sufficient condition for subgroup of a finite group:** If a subset $S$ of a finite $G$ is closed over the group product, then it forms a subgroup.

*Proof:* TODO

If $H$ is a subgroup of $G$, then we can define a relation on $G$ called **congruence modulo $H$** by

$$a \equiv b \text{mod} H$ if $\exists h \in H a = hb$.

Equivalently $a \equiv b \text{mod} H$ iff $ab^{-1} \in H$

**Congruence modulo a subgroup is an equivalence relation:** Clearly $a \equiv a \text{mod} H$, since $e \in H$. If $\exists h$ such that $a = hb$, then $h^{-1} a = b$, so that the relation is symmetric. Finally, if $a = hb$, $b = gc$, then $a = (hg)c$. Because $H$ is a subgroup, this means that $a \equiv c \text{mod} H$. $\Box$

A **(right) coset** of a subgroup $H$ in $G$ is the subset of $G$ defined by

$$\{ha : h \in H\}$$

for some $a \in G$. The following is nearly immediate:

**The right cosets of $H$ are the equivalence classes of congruence modulo $H$**.

This means that the right cosets of $H$ in $G$ partition $G$. We have nearly proved a very important fact about groups, and will lock in the missing piece now:

**Cosets are the same size:** We prove there is a bijection between any right coset $Hg$ and $H$. Think about how we generate the elements of $Hg$. We could not have $h_1 g = h_2 g$ for distinct $h_1$ and $h_2$ due to cancellation. Hence the function $H \rightarrow Hg$ defined by $h \mapsto hg$ is well-defined and an injection. It's also a surjection due to $Hg$ basically being defined as the image of this function.

Since every right coset of $H$ is bijective to $H$, any two right cosets are in bijection (the composition of bijections is a bijection). $\Box$

**Lagrange's theorem:** If $G$ is a finite group and $H$ a subgroup of $G$, then $|H|$ divides $|G|$. This is because the right cosets of $H$ partition $G$ into $|H|$-sized blocks, as proven above. $\Box$

The **index** of a subgroup $H$ of $G$, denoted $[G : H]$, is the number of right cosets it generates.

- groups of prime order are cyclic

## Homomorphisms and normal subgroups

A **group homomorphism** from group $G$ to group $K$ is a function $\phi: G \rightarrow K$ such that $\phi(gh) = \phi(g) \phi(h)$ for all $g, h \in G$.

In a group $G$, the product $gh$ means that when $g, h \in G$ come together to interact, they do a dance and end up as $gh$. The homomorphism is a way of nominating, for each $g \in G$, an element of $k$ to stand-in for $g$ in all the interactions in $K$. So for the stand-ins $\phi(g)$ and $\phi(h)$, they must interact in $K$ in such a way as to end up as $gh$'s stand-in, $\phi(gh)$. (This story kind of sucks, but I'm hoping I can modify it to make it work at some time in the future)

An **isomorphism** is a bijective group homomorphism. An **automorphism** is an isomorphism from $G \rightarrow G$ for some group $G$.

(I'm going to introduce a string of seemingly unrelated things now, because I don't know how to motivate their introduction.)

Some basic facts about homomorphisms follow.

**Homomorphisms map units to units:** If $\phi: G \rightarrow K$ is a homomorphism, then $\phi(e_G) = \phi(e_G e_G) = \phi(e_G) \phi(e_G)$. This implies $\phi(e_G) = e_K$. $\Box$

**Homomorphisms map inverses to inverses:** If $\phi: G \rightarrow K$ is a homomorphism, then $\phi(e_G) = \phi(g g^{-1}) = \phi(g) \phi(g^{-1})$. By cancellation, $\phi(g^{-1}) = \phi(g)^{-1}$. $\Box$

**Image of a homomorphism is a subgroup:** If $\phi : G \rightarrow H$ is a group homomorpism, then if $a, b \in \phi(G)$, $\exists s, t \in G$ such that $\phi(s) = a$, $\phi(t) = b$. Hence $\phi(st) = ab$, so $ab \in \phi(G)$ as well. Since $\phi(a)^{-1} = \phi(a^{-1}$, the image is closed under inverses also. $\Box$

The **kernel** of a homomorphism $\phi:G \rightarrow K$ is the subset of $G$ that map to $e_K$, i.e.

$$\text{ker} \phi := \{g \in G: \phi(g) = e_K\}$$

**Kernel is a subgroup:** If $N$ is the kernel of a homomorphism $\phi: G \rightarrow K$, then $N$ is a subgroup of $G$.

*Proof:* If $a,b \in N$, $\phi(a) = e_K = \phi(b)$, so $\phi(ab) = e_K e_K = e_K$. Also, $\phi(a^{-1})

If $G$ is a group, $a, g \in G$, then the element $gag^{-1}$ is the result of **conjugation by $g$ of $a$**. We can extend this definition to the conjugation of an entire subset of $G$: for subset $S$, $gSg^{-1} := \{ gsg^{-1} : s \in S \}$. In other words, $gSg^{-1}$ is the set formed by conjugating every element of $S$ by $g$.

Here's a curious fact:

**Kernel of a homomorphism is closed under conjugation:** For any homomorphism $\phi : G \rightarrow K$, and any $g \in G$, $g(\text{ker} \phi)g^{-1} \subseteq \text{ker} \phi$

*Proof:* Let's say $n \in \text{ker} \phi$. For any $g \in G$,

$$\begin{align} \phi(gng^{-1}) = \phi(g) \phi(n) \phi(g^{-1}) = \phi(g) e_K \phi(g)^{-1} = e_K$$

which proves $gng^{-1}$ is in the kernel of $\phi$. $\Box$

**Characterization of subgroups closed under conjugation:** If $H$ is a subgroup of $G$, then $H$ is closed under conjugation ($\forall g, gHg^{-1} \subseteq H$) iff $gHg^{-1} = H$.

*Proof:* Clearly $gHg^{-1} = H$ implies $H$ is closed under conjugation. Conversely, we just need to prove that if $gHg^{-1} \subseteq H$ for all $g$, then $H \subseteq gHg^{-1}$ (for all $g$) as well. If $h \in H$, certainly $x = g^{-1} h g \in H$. Hence $gxg^{-1} = g(g^{-1}hg)g^{-1} = h$, so $H \subseteq gHg^{-1}$. $\Box$

See [Timothy Gowers's blog post](http://gowers.wordpress.com/2011/11/20/normal-subgroups-and-quotient-groups/) for the details (and better exposition than you will find here), but at some point mathematicians considered (or realized) whether (that) a converse to the proposition just proved was true: that if some subgroup $N$ of $G$ was closed under conjugation, then we could find a homomorphism originating at $G$ into some other group for which $N$ is the kernel. We attempt to derive that now.

### Quotient sets

If $X$ and $Y$ are sets and $f: X \rightarrow Y$ is a function, then for $y \in Y$, the **fiber above $y$** is the set

$$pre(f, y) := \{ x \in X : f(x) = y$$

So a fiber of a function is the preimage of a single element of $Y$. It should be clear that the collection of fibers of elements in the image of $f$ is a **partition** of $X$: no element of $X$ is mapped to distinct elements of $Y$, and every element of $X$ is mapped somewhere. Hence the fibers cover $X$ and are disjoint, so they form a bona fide partition.

We can form the set of all components in the partition, notated $X/f$. As a shorthand we'll notate the component of the partition that $x \in X$ belongs to by $[x]$. We will call the entire collection of $[x]$'s the **quotient set** induced by $f$. The only thing we'll note for now is that the function $f$ can be decomposed into two functions, a surjection $q: X \rightarrow X/f$ defined by $q(x) = [x]$, and an injection $g: X/f \rightarrow Y$ defined by $g([x]) = f(x)$.

### Back to kernels and homomorphisms

Since we have no obvious means of constructing a homomorphism given a subgroup closed under conjugation, we will assume that we have found such a homomorphism and see what must be true, hoping to work our way backwards to the definition of the homomorphism.

**Lemma:** If $N$ is the kernel of a homomorphism $\phi: G \rightarrow K$, then $\phi$ is constant over each right coset $Ng$ of $N$, and distinct cosets are mapped to distinct values in $K$.

*Proof:* For all $g \in G$, $n \in N$, $\phi(ng) = \phi(n) \phi(g) = e_K \phi(g) = \phi(g)$ (which proves that $\forall x \in Ng$, $\phi(x) = \phi(g)$). Also, if $\phi(a) = \phi(b)$, then $e_k = \phi(b) \phi(a^{-1})$, which implies $ba^{-1} \in N$. This gives us an element $n$ in $N$ such that $na = b$, hence $b \in Na$. This establishes that for all $a,b \in G$, $\phi(a) = \phi(b)$ iff $Na = Nb$. $\Box$

This proves that right cosets of the kernel are exactly the fibers of the homomorphism. If we define "left cosets", will we get a similar result?

A **left coset** of a subgroup $H$ of $G$ is the set $gH := \{ gh : h \in H\}$.

**Lemma:** If $N$ is the kernel of a homomorphism $\phi: G \rightarrow K$, then $\phi$ is constant over each left coset $Ng$ of $N$, and distinct cosets are mapped to distinct values in $K$.

*Proof:* The same strategy holds: $\phi(gn) = \phi(g), so $\phi$ is constant over any left coset, and $\phi(a) = \phi(b)$ implies $\phi(a^{-1}b) = e_K$, or $a^{-1}b \in N$. This shows that $b \in aN$, so $aN = bN$. $\Box$

So the left cosets of the kernel are also the fibers of the homomorphism. There's only one collection of fibers, so the left cosets and the right cosets are the same sets. Also, $a \in aN$ and $a \in Na$, so $aN = Na$ for all $a \in G$. This establishes

**Proposition:** If $N$ is the kernel of a homomorphism, then $aN = Na$ for all $a$.

This doesn't necessarily mean that every $a$ commutes with every element of $N$. All it means is that for every $n \in N$, there's an $n_0 \in N$ such that $an = n_0 a$.

Since left and right cosets of a kernel are the same, we can safely refer to them simply as cosets.

As with any function, we can define a **quotient set** $G/N$ to be the cosets of $N$ (that is, the fibers of $\phi$) in $G$. However, there is more that we would like to do, because the original function was not merely a function, but a group homomorphism. And the original set $G$ was not merely a set, but a group. Can we possibly set up a group operation on $G/N$ that would allow us to factor the original homomorphism? I.e., can we turn $G/N$ into a group in such a way that $\phi$ can be factored into the composition of a surjective homomorphism $q: G \rightarrow G/N$ and an injective homomorphism $g: G/N \rightarrow K$?

Yes. This fact allows us to create not merely a quotient set, but a *quotient group*.

**Quotient group:** If $\phi : G \rightarrow K$ is a homomorphism and $N$ is the kernel of $\phi$, then the set $G/N$ of right cosets of $N$ can be made into a group by defining

$$Na \cdot Nb := N(ab)$$

This definition allows us to factor $\phi$ by $\phi = g \circ q$ where $q : G \rightarrow G/N$ and $g: G/N \rightarrow K$ are homomorphisms defined by $q(a) := Na$ and $g(Na) := \phi(a)$.

*Proof:* We only need prove that the product is well-defined. The rest of the group properties will follow from the group properties of $G$.  So we must prove that if $x \in Na$ and $y \in Nb$, then $xy \in Nab$. But $x \in Na$ and $y \in Nb$ means that there are $n_0, n_1 \in N$ such that $x = n_0 a$ and $y = n_1 b$. so $xy = n_0 a n_1 b$. Since $Na = aN$, there exists an $n_2 \in N$ such that $a n_1 = n_2 a$. Hence $xy = n_0 n_2 ab$, or $xy \in Nab$. We leave verification that $(G/N, \circ)$ is associative, has a unit, has inverses under the product in question to the reader.

Notice that the product in $G/N$ is basically expressly defined to make $q: G \rightarrow G/N$ sending $a \mapsto Na$ into a homomorphism. We must also show that $g(Nab) =g(Na) g(Nb)$, or $\phi(ab) = \phi(a) \phi(b)$, which is immediate from $\phi$ being a homomorphism.

Finally, note that $g$ and $q$ are defined such that $\phi = g \circ q$. $\Box$

We have defined quotient groups for kernels of a homomorphism, but what of our original quest to find a homomorphism for an arbitrary subgroup closed under conjugation?

Looking over the proof, you might be able to see that we don't actually need to know that $N$ is a kernel of some homomorphism in order to establish the quotient group. We just need that the left cosets are the same as the right cosets. The following proposition will help us make some sense of this:

**Proposition:** For all $g \in G$, $gN = Ng$ iff $gNg^{-1} = N$

*Proof:* If $gN = Ng$, then $x \in gNg^{-1} means $x = gng^{-1}$ for some $n \in N$. But there exists an $n_0 \in N$ such that $gn = n_0 g$, so $x = n_0 g g^{-1} = n_0$. Hence $x \in N$ and $gNg^{-1} \subseteq N$. On the other hand, if $n \in N$, we can find an $n_1$ such that $g n_1 = n g$, or $n = $g n_1 g^{-1}$. So $N = gNg^{-1}$.

Conversely, if $gNg^{-1} = N$, then for every $n \in N$ $\exists n_0 \in N$ such that g n_0 g^{-1} = n$, or $g n_0 = n g$. This proves $Ng \subseteq gN$. Similarly, for all $n \in N$ there's a $n_0 \in N$ such that $ g n g^{-1} = n_0$, or gn = n_0 g$, proving $gN \subseteq Ng$. This proves that $gN = Ng$. $\Box$

Combine this with the earlier fact that a subgroup is closed under conjugation iff its conjugation by any element of $G$ is the subgroup again, and we have that a subgroup is closed under conjugation iff its left cosets are equal to its right cosets.

**Quotient groups, no, for real:** If $N$ is a subgroup of $G$ closed under conjugation, then we can define a group $G/N$ of cosets of $N$ with the product defined as before: $(Na) \cdot (Nb) = Nab$. Then the function $q: G \rightarrow G/N$ defined by $a \mapsto Na$ is a homomorphism, and $N$ is the kernel of $q$.

*Proof:* $G/N$ is a group for the same reasons as above. $q(ab) = Nab = (Na) \cdot (Nb) = q(a) q(b)$, so $q$ is a homomorphism. Finally, for all $n \in N$, $q(n) = Nn = N = Ne$, which is the unit of $G/N$. And if $q(x) = Nx = N$, then $x \in N$. So $N$ is the kernel of $q$. $\Box$

Since the property of being closed under conjugation allows us to define quotient groups (which, we shall see, is a big deal), it makes sense to give this property a name. A **normal subgroup** is a subgroup closed under conjugation.


**Theorem:** If $N$ is the kernel of a homomorphism $\phi: G \rightarrow K$, then the quotient group $G/N$ is isomorphic to the image of $\phi$.

*Proof:* TODO

## Gotta figure out how to group this stuff now

**Lemma:** A homomorphism $\phi: G \rightarrow K$ is injective iff the kernel of $\phi$ is $\{ e \}$, i.e. is trivial.

*Proof:* The cosets of the kernel are the fibers of the homomorphism, so since every coset is bijective to the kernel, if the kernel has more than one element the homomorphism fails to be injective. Conversely, no two distinct cosets get mapped to the same value, so if the kernel is trivial, every element of $G$ is in its own coset, and thus has its own value, making the homomorphism injective. $\Box$

